GENAI EDITOR -- TECHNICAL ARCHITECTURE
======================================

This document explains HOW the app works internally, with the heaviest
focus on the guarantee the whole design exists to protect: how it
edits video without ever re-encoding a pixel unless you explicitly
ask it to, and exactly what happens to your data at each step of a
render.

It assumes you already know what the app does from a user's
perspective (see README.txt for that, or click the document icon in
the top bar for the in-app About dialog). This is the "how" document,
written for someone reading or modifying the code.


CONTENTS
--------
 1. What this app actually is
 2. System topology (two servers, no shell, no auth)
 3. The core idea: edits are decisions, not media operations
 4. EXPORT QUALITY MODES: lossless, size-capped, and custom
 5. THE RENDER FILTER GRAPH (build_timeline_filter), step by step
 6. Frame-accurate math: epsilons, frame budgets, and why they matter
 7. The clip data model
 8. Three tracks: V1, V2, A1 -- Analyze, Reconstruct, overlay, bed
 9. The A1 stem render (audio alone, timed to the picture)
10. Reformat: the one-shot resize outside the timeline
11. Preview transcoding is fully isolated from the lossless path
12. The Agentic Assistant Editor and its security model
13. What persists on disk
14. Backend API reference
15. Known sharp edges


1. WHAT THIS APP ACTUALLY IS
-----------------------------

GenAI Editor is a local, single-user, EDL-style (Edit Decision
List) video editor. It is not a hosted service, has no accounts, and
binds only to 127.0.0.1 -- it never listens on the network. It is a
Flask JSON API backend that drives ffmpeg, paired with a React 19 +
Vite + Tailwind 4 frontend. It also doubles as a general ffmpeg
workspace: a chat panel lets you describe an edit in English and get a
runnable ffmpeg command back, gated behind an approval step.

Its one core promise is this: every edit you stage on the timeline is
applied in exactly one ffmpeg encode pass, and if you choose the
Lossless quality mode, every pixel in your output is bit-for-bit
identical to the corresponding pixel in your source -- verified by
comparing raw frame hashes, not by eye and not by a similarity score
like PSNR.

Three of the six export modes deliberately break that promise, and say
so: the size-capped modes (Under 50MB, Under 50MB HEVC, and Custom)
trade bit-exactness for a hard, VERIFIED byte ceiling, because
"lossless AND always under N megabytes" is unsatisfiable for arbitrary
footage -- entropy depends on content. Those modes still render the
timeline in one pass over the same filter graph; only the encoder
settings differ, and they run that pass twice (see section 4).


2. SYSTEM TOPOLOGY
--------------------

Two processes run side by side:

    Flask backend      127.0.0.1:5001   app.py
    Vite dev server    localhost:5173   frontend/ (React UI)

The Vite dev server proxies /api, /input, /output, and /preview
requests straight through to Flask (see frontend/vite.config.js), so
the browser only ever talks to one origin and no CORS handling exists
anywhere in the code. The React UI is 100% dependent on Flask being up
-- every fetch 404s otherwise.

One practical note for anything that talks to the dev server from a
script rather than a browser: Vite is left at its default host, which
on this machine binds IPv6 localhost ONLY. "curl
http://127.0.0.1:5173/" is refused while "curl http://[::1]:5173/"
works. Browsers resolve localhost themselves and are unaffected;
curl-based checks have to use the bracketed IPv6 form. Flask is on
IPv4 127.0.0.1:5001 as written.

Flask also serves a second, much older UI directly at
http://127.0.0.1:5001/ (templates/index.html + static/app.js, plain
JavaScript, no build step). It supports only upload/trim/splice/hold/
reverse/chat and is intentionally feature-frozen -- it predates the
timeline/render pipeline described in this document and is kept only
as a working fallback.


3. THE CORE IDEA: EDITS ARE DECISIONS, NOT MEDIA OPERATIONS
--------------------------------------------------------------

Every trim, hold, reverse, speed change, or crop you make in the UI is
stored as plain data on a JavaScript object -- nothing touches a file
on disk. The timeline is not a working copy of your media; it is a
list of decisions about how to eventually build one. Nothing is
written to the export folder until you click Render, at which point the
ENTIRE decision list is sent to the backend in one HTTP request and
rendered in one ffmpeg process.

This matters technically for two reasons:

  - There is no accumulation of generation loss. A ten-times-edited
    clip that has never been rendered has been re-encoded zero times.
    Contrast with editors that apply each edit destructively to a
    working file -- every such edit is a fresh encode, and lossy
    formats degrade a little more each time.

  - Undo is free and instant, because "undo" just means popping a
    JavaScript object off a history stack (see
    frontend/src/hooks/useUndoableState.js) -- there is no file state
    to roll back.

The on-screen Edit Decision List (EdlTable.jsx) is a literal rendering
of this philosophy: source file, IN/OUT points, hold durations,
reversed flag, and speed, per clip, in SMPTE-style timecode. You can
export this list as a CMX-style .edl text file, or export/import the
whole timeline as a .nara JSON file to resume editing later.

Two things on the timeline are SEQUENCE-level decisions rather than
per-clip ones, and travel in the render request beside the clip list
instead of inside it: the A1 audio bed (section 8) and the A1 Room
Tone toggle (section 5). "Render without audio" is a third, chosen per
render in the render dialog rather than stored at all.


4. EXPORT QUALITY MODES: LOSSLESS, SIZE-CAPPED, AND CUSTOM
--------------------------------------------------------------

encode_args() (ffmpeg_utils.py) is the single most important function
in the codebase for the app's core claim. It picks the ffmpeg encoder
flags for the active quality mode, and the choice made for the default
mode is deliberately unusual and hand-verified rather than copied from
common advice.

Six modes (EXPORT_QUALITIES), chosen globally in Export Settings and
stored in .export_settings.json:

    lossless (default)  -qp 0             bit-exact, largest files
    match               ABR at source bitrate, 1.5x cap  ~same size
    high                CRF 18            visually lossless, smaller
    under50mb           two-pass libx264  hard 50MB cap, verified
    under50mb_hevc      two-pass libx265  same cap, better + slower
    custom              two-pass, your own flags and your own cap

The first three ARE an encode_args() list: one ffmpeg invocation, one
pass. The last three cannot be expressed that way at all -- they need
two full ffmpeg invocations plus a measure-and-retry loop -- so they
are named in MULTIPASS_QUALITIES and every render route checks that
membership before falling through to the single-pass path. All six
render routes hand the same input/filter args to one dispatcher,
app.multipass_export_render(), which routes to render_size_capped()
(the two fixed 50MB modes) or render_custom_two_pass() (Custom) and
raises RuntimeError on failure so each route's existing error handling
reports it unchanged.

LOSSLESS MODE: WHY -qp 0 AND NOT -crf 0

The internet's standard advice for "lossless x264" is -crf 0. This app
deliberately does NOT use that flag. Instead:

    -c:v libx264 -qp 0 -preset medium

-crf 0 is libx264's rate-control mode at its most conservative
setting -- it still runs through the encoder's perceptual
rate-distortion optimizer, just tuned all the way toward quality. -qp 0
instead fixes the quantizer to zero for every macroblock directly,
bypassing that rate-control heuristic entirely.

The difference is not theoretical here: it was hand-verified on this
project's actual ffmpeg build (Homebrew libx264) that -crf 0 does NOT
round-trip bit-exact on 10-bit sources (yuv420p10le) -- only -qp 0
does. -crf 0 = lossless is true for 8-bit content, which is why it's
the commonly cited flag, but this app's whole purpose is editing
arbitrary source footage, some of which may be a 10-bit master. Rather
than ship a flag that's "lossless most of the time," it ships the one
that was actually confirmed lossless on the sources that matter.

Two side effects of -qp 0, both expected and harmless:

  - libx264 always switches to the H.264 "High 4:4:4 Predictive"
    profile under -qp 0. You will see this in Media Info Out even
    though your source may have used a completely different profile.

  - Losslessly re-encoding a source that was ALREADY lossy (i.e. any
    normal camera or streaming file, not a raw/lossless master)
    typically produces a file 2-3x the size of the source. This is
    not a bug -- it is the mathematical cost of preserving information
    a lossy encoder had already thrown away encoding decisions for.
    You are not losing anything further; you are paying disk space to
    stop losing anything further.

MATCH MODE

Targets the source's own video bitrate as an ABR (average bitrate)
target, with a 1.5x maxrate ceiling and a buffer twice the target size
(standard libx264 VBV settings to avoid quality collapse on complex
frames while still averaging back down). If the source stream doesn't
report its own bitrate, it's estimated as (container bitrate - audio
bitrate); if that's unavailable too, it falls back to High mode.

HIGH MODE

CRF 18 -- visually lossless to the eye, usually noticeably smaller
than the source, no bit-exactness guarantee.

THE SIZE-CAPPED MODES (under50mb, under50mb_hevc)

render_size_capped() renders the same filter graph twice and then
weighs the result:

  1. target_bitrate_for_size() splits the byte budget into a video
     and an audio bitrate: budget = 50MiB * 8 * 0.92 bits (the 0.92
     absorbs container/muxing overhead), audio held at the source's own
     rate with a 96 kbps floor, video taking whatever is left. If that
     would starve video below MIN_VIDEO_BITRATE (100 kbps), video
     claims its floor first and audio is squeezed down to as low as
     32 kbps -- video is the dimension being asked to look as good as
     possible, so it gets first claim.
  2. Pass 1 encodes video only, with its output thrown away
     (-f null /dev/null), purely to write a per-frame complexity map.
  3. Pass 2 re-encodes against that map and muxes the real file.
  4. The finished file is MEASURED with os.path.getsize. If it still
     exceeds the cap, the bitrate is shrunk 15% (0.85 ** attempt) and
     both passes run again, up to 4 attempts.

Two-pass is a deliberate choice over the alternatives: CRF has no size
guarantee at all (it targets a quality level, and size follows from
content), and single-pass ABR cannot see the whole file's complexity in
advance, so its real output routinely drifts several percent off
target. Two-pass plus measurement is what lets this mode claim a hard
cap rather than an estimate.

Codec differences here are measured, not assumed. libx264 uses
-pass N -passlogfile <prefix>. libx265 has no such options at all;
two-pass is expressed as -x265-params "pass=N:stats=<file>" -- but it
DOES honour the same top-level -maxrate/-bufsize flags (confirmed via
the encoded stream's own reported CPB properties), so those need no
codec branch. The stats/log files each encoder leaves behind have
different suffixes (_PASSLOG_SUFFIXES) and are cleaned up in a finally
block. HEVC output is not in BROWSER_SAFE_VIDEO_CODECS, so previewing
an HEVC export in-app automatically goes through the transcode path in
section 11 -- it is a delivery format, not a working one.

THE CUSTOM MODE

Custom is the same shape of mode with every value taken from data
instead of hardcoded. The settings live in the "custom" block of
.export_settings.json, are edited in the FFmpeg Custom Settings window
(the gear in the top bar), and are validated by
normalize_export_settings() before they can reach an ffmpeg argv:

    target_mib     the hard cap                    (default 50.0)
    safety         fraction of the budget used     (default 0.90)
    codec          libx265 | libx264               (default libx265)
    preset         ultrafast .. veryslow           (default slow)
    profile        per-codec allowlist             (default main10)
    pix_fmt        p010le | yuv420p10le | yuv420p  (default
                                                    yuv420p10le)
    maxrate_mult   x bitrate                       (default 0.95)
    bufsize_mult   x bitrate                       (default 1.5)
    extra_args     free-text raw ffmpeg flags      (default empty)

The bitrate formula is exactly as specified for this mode:

    kbps = (target_bytes * 8 * safety) / duration_s / 1000

Note what that deliberately does NOT do, in contrast to
target_bitrate_for_size() above: it hands the WHOLE byte budget to
video and reserves nothing for audio. The AAC track is muxed on top,
which is what the safety headroom is there to absorb, and the
measure-and-retry loop (identical to the one above) is what actually
enforces the cap. Two consequences worth knowing: with the default
0.90 headroom and a maxrate BELOW the average bitrate (0.95x), VBV
holds the real file at roughly 0.84-0.86 of the cap rather than right
against it; and on a long render with high-bitrate source audio, audio
can eat enough of the budget that the first attempt overshoots and a
retry is needed -- each retry re-encodes both passes, so it costs real
time. Lower the headroom for those rather than expecting the formula
to account for audio.

The extra-args field is validated STRUCTURALLY, not by blocking
characters: the string is shlex.split into an argv list, the first
token must look like a flag, a whole "ffmpeg ..." command is rejected,
anything in _EXTRA_ARG_CONFLICTS is rejected with the reason why
(-i, -pass, -vf/-filter_complex, -b:v, -maxrate, -c:v, -preset, -y and
friends -- each either owned by the two-pass machinery, computed from
the target size, or already covered by a field in the window), and any
token that looks like a path must resolve inside input/ or the export
directory. There is no character blocklist for the same reason as in
section 12: subprocess.run always receives an argv list, never a shell
string. Output-only flags such as -movflags or -tag:v hvc1 are safe to
put here -- measured: the null muxer in pass 1 silently ignores them,
so the same argv can ride in both passes.

Named PRESETS (bundles of all nine fields, {name, settings}) are saved
in the same file, capped at 200, unique case-insensitively (macOS
filesystem semantics), and are copied into every .nara project so a
project travels with its delivery settings. "Preset" therefore means
two different things in this feature and the wire format keeps them
apart: ffmpeg's -preset speed knob is custom_options.encoder_presets,
the saved bundles are presets.

AUDIO

Audio is lossy (AAC) by nature regardless of mode, so there is no
"lossless audio" mode to offer. What the app does instead is refuse to
let the encoder degrade audio any further than the source already was:
bitrate is set to whichever is higher of the source's own audio
bitrate or a floor, and sample rate / channel count are copied from the
source rather than left at ffmpeg's defaults (which would silently
resample/downmix). The floor is 192 kbps in the three single-pass
modes; the size-capped modes use a lower one (96 kbps) and may squeeze
below it, because there the audio bitrate is competing with video for a
fixed byte budget. This is the one place lossy is unavoidable, so the
code's job is damage control, not perfection.

VERIFICATION METHODOLOGY

Every lossless claim in this document and in the code is checked the
same way: run "ffmpeg -f framemd5" against both the source and the
render, and compare every single frame's hash. Not a spot check, not a
visual comparison, not PSNR. This is enforced project convention (see
.claude/skills/verify-render/SKILL.md) any time build_timeline_filter
or encode_args changes.


5. THE RENDER FILTER GRAPH (build_timeline_filter), STEP BY STEP
----------------------------------------------------------------

/api/render_timeline takes the whole clip list and calls
build_timeline_filter() once to produce a single ffmpeg -filter_complex
string. Every clip's overlay, crop, holds, trim, reversal, and speed
change are expressed as one continuous chain of filters feeding into
one shared concat node -- the entire timeline renders in one ffmpeg
process, one encode pass, no intermediate files. (For the three
size-capped modes that one graph is run twice, unchanged, by the
two-pass machinery in section 4.)

Per clip, in this exact order:

    STEP 0  overlay composite  (if a V2 region is placed back on)
    STEP 1  crop               (if a crop box was set; animatable)
    STEP 2  split              (if that filtered source feeds more
                                than one chain below)
    STEP 3  lead hold          (if this is the first clip)
    STEP 4  trim -> reverse -> speed stretch   (the main body)
    STEP 5  trail hold         (if this is the last clip)
    STEP 6  concat the above pieces into one clip segment
    STEP 7  scale/pad/fps-normalize to the timeline's common canvas
    STEP 8  hard-cap the frame count (see section 6)

Then all clips' normalized segments are concatenated once more into
the final output labels.

STEP 0 -- OVERLAY COMES FIRST, BEFORE THE CROP

An overlay is a region that was cropped OUT of this clip, processed by
some external tool, and is being placed back exactly where it came
from, following the same animated path (see section 8 for the feature;
this is just its position in the graph). Its input is time-aligned to
the clip's own trim window with setpts=PTS-STARTPTS+in_sec/TB, because
the processed region starts at frame 0 of its own file but belongs at
in_sec on the source's clock.

A clip may carry BOTH an overlay and a crop, and the order is
load-bearing: compositing first and cropping second is the only order
that works, because cropping first would throw away the very pixels
the overlay is meant to be placed back onto. In practice the app never
sends both for the same clip -- clipsToPayload nulls an overlaid
clip's crop, since the whole point is the full original frame with the
processed region on top -- but the graph supports it and the ordering
is what makes that safe.

eof_action=pass and repeatlast=0 mean a shorter overlay simply stops
compositing (the background continues untouched) instead of freezing
its last frame over the rest of the clip, and never truncates the
render to the overlay's length. Hand-verified: with an overlay
covering source t=1..4 of a 5s background, frames outside that window
come back pixel-clean, the output keeps its full 150-frame length, and
the region the overlay never touches is BIT-EXACT against the same
render without it.

STEP 1 -- CROP, BEFORE THE TRIM AND THE HOLD SAMPLING

    [0:v]crop=W:H:X:Y[vsrc0]

Crop is defined as a spatial transform of the WHOLE source, not
something tied to the trim window. It has to run before both the main
trim and the hold sampling, because a hold freezes a frame from the
same input at a DIFFERENT timestamp than the main body -- if crop ran
later, it would need to be applied twice (once for the hold's frame,
once for the main body), doubling the chance of the two drifting out
of sync. Cropping once, upstream of everything, guarantees the hold
freeze and the main footage are always cropped identically.

The crop box can be ANIMATED: a clip may carry a list of keyframes,
each an (t, x, y) position in SOURCE time, and the box then pans
linearly between them. That is expressed as a piecewise-linear
if(lt(t,...)) expression built by one module-level generator
(keyframe_ladder), which serves the animated crop and the animated
overlay position both. Because both filters sit here -- upstream of
trim, reverse and speed -- their `t` is always source time, and holds,
reversal, slow motion and concat all inherit correct behavior with no
animation-specific handling anywhere downstream. This is the single
biggest reason the ordering in this section is fixed.

STEP 2 -- SPLIT WHEN ONE FILTERED SOURCE FEEDS SEVERAL CHAINS

A raw input pad ([0:v]) can be read by several filters and ffmpeg
auto-splits it, but a FILTER-PRODUCED label cannot be consumed twice.
Once a clip has an overlay or a crop, its per-clip source is
filter-produced, so if the lead hold, the main body and the trail hold
all need it, an explicit split=N is inserted first.

STEP 3 & 5 -- HOLD (FROZEN FRAME) MECHANICS

A hold is built as: isolate exactly one source frame with trim, reset
its timestamp to zero, then use ffmpeg's loop filter to repeat that
single buffered frame enough times to fill the requested duration.

    [vsrc0]trim=start=T:end=T+1/fps,setpts=PTS-STARTPTS,
           loop=loop=N:size=1:start=0,setpts=PTS-STARTPTS[vlead0]

loop's size=1 means its buffer holds exactly one frame; N is
round(hold_seconds * fps) - 1, because trim's own output already
counts as the first occurrence of that frame, so only N additional
repeats are needed to reach the target frame count. The hold's audio
is a gap of the hold's exact duration -- always pure digital silence.
Room tone, when on, is summed over that gap from a separate track
rather than substituted into it (see below).

WHICH TIMESTAMP A HOLD FREEZES ON FLIPS UNDER REVERSAL

A hold always freezes the frame that is visually ADJACENT to it in
final playback order. For a forward clip, the lead hold (which plays
first) freezes the frame at inSec, because that's also the first frame
of the main body that follows it. But if the clip is reversed, the
main body's first-played frame is actually the one originally at
outSec (since it now plays backward) -- so the lead hold must freeze
outSec instead, or there would be a visible jump-cut between the
frozen frame and the first frame of playback. The trail hold mirrors
this in the opposite direction. This swap is driven by a single
ternary keyed on the clip's reversed flag.

STEP 4 -- TRIM, THEN REVERSE, THEN SPEED (in that fixed order)

    [vsrc0]trim=start=IN:end=OUT,setpts=PTS-STARTPTS,reverse,
           setpts=(1/speed)*PTS[vmain0]

This order is not arbitrary. trim followed by setpts=PTS-STARTPTS
isolates the clip's window and re-zeroes its timestamps to start at
zero -- this is mandatory before reverse, which needs a bounded,
self-contained stream it can buffer and play backward; it cannot
reverse an unbounded live feed. reverse must therefore run on the
already-trimmed, already-zeroed segment. The speed stretch runs LAST,
after reversal, so that it stretches the timing of the segment that is
already in its final (possibly reversed) frame order.

Speed itself is a pure PTS stretch: setpts=(1/speed)*PTS with speed in
(0, 1] multiplies every frame's presentation timestamp by a factor
greater than or equal to 1, holding each frame on screen longer. NO
interpolation happens and NO frames are generated -- when the
downstream fps-normalization step (Step 7) resamples this stretched,
now-sparser timeline back onto a constant frame rate, it fills the gap
by repeating existing frames, not by inventing new ones.

A slowed segment gets silent audio, not stretched real audio --
stretching real audio's timing would shift its pitch and tempo, which
is explicitly out of scope for what this feature promises ("lossless
time stretch" refers to the video only). The app also refuses any
speed value that would drop the EFFECTIVE frame rate (source fps x
speed) below 12 fps, since below that threshold slow motion stops
reading as smooth and starts reading as a stutter -- this is a
perceptual-quality guard enforced server-side, not a filter limitation.

STEP 6 -- CONCAT THE PER-CLIP PIECES

Whichever of [lead hold, main body, trail hold] actually exist for
this clip (1 to 3 pieces) are concatenated into one per-clip segment.
If there's only one piece, concat is skipped entirely (ffmpeg's concat
filter requires at least 2 inputs, so calling it with 1 would be
invalid).

A hold's silence is what OFFSETS that clip's own audio: the gap piece
is concatenated ahead of the main audio in the same order the freeze is
prepended to the video, so a head hold pushes the clip's dialogue later
by exactly the hold and the two tracks stay frame-aligned. That makes
the gap's LENGTH load-bearing -- it is quantized to lead_frames/fps
(the freeze's own frame count), never the raw requested hold, because a
hold that isn't a frame multiple would otherwise run the audio late
against the picture and lose the overflow off the tail to the per-clip
atrim.

STEP 7 -- NORMALIZE EVERY CLIP TO ONE SHARED CANVAS

    scale=W:H:force_original_aspect_ratio=decrease,
    pad=W:H:(ow-iw)/2:(oh-ih)/2,setsar=1,fps=FPS

Every clip in the timeline can come from a different source resolution
and frame rate. Before the final concat, each clip's segment is scaled
to fit inside the timeline's shared target canvas without cropping or
distorting its aspect ratio, then letterboxed/pillarboxed (centered,
padded with black) to exactly fill that canvas, then resampled to the
shared frame rate -- all of which ffmpeg's concat filter requires
every input to already agree on. The target width/height/fps
themselves are computed as the MAXIMUM across every clip in the
timeline (using each clip's post-crop size if it was cropped), so
nothing in the timeline is ever downscaled to match a smaller
neighbor -- only smaller clips get scaled up to match the biggest
one. Overlays deliberately do not influence that target: the frame
size is V1's.

STEP 8 -- THE HARD FRAME-COUNT CAP

Covered in detail in the next section, because it's the kind of bug
you can't see until you go looking for it with exact frame hashes.

THE THREE TERMINAL FORMS OF THE GRAPH

The graph ends in one of exactly three ways, and [outa] is the
contract every one of them honors, so the caller's -map "[outa]" never
has to change:

  - no_audio=True -- clips are concatenated with a=0 and the graph
    declares [outv] ONLY. Adding -an instead is NOT a substitute and
    was measured: -an disables an INPUT stream, and these audio chains
    reference [i:a] directly, so ffmpeg fails with "Cannot decode a
    disabled input stream". The caller must also drop -map "[outa]",
    since mapping a label the graph never declared is a hard error.
  - no bed -- straight to [outv][outa], the ordinary case.
  - with an A1 bed -- clips concat to [outv][aseq], the bed's own
    branch builds [abed], and the two are summed into [outa].

no_audio combined with a bed (or with the room tone fill) is
structurally impossible and raises ValueError -> 400; the frontend
drops both whenever "Render without audio" is checked, so the two
never reach the builder together.

THE A1 BED BRANCH

The bed (section 8 for what it is) is a purely audio-side addition: it
cannot change a single video frame, hand-verified by framemd5 across
no-bed / short / long / exact-length beds. Its branch is
adelay=delays=<ms>:all=1 -> aformat -> apad=whole_dur=N ->
atrim=end=N -> asetpts -> volume=BED_GAIN, mixed with
amix=inputs=2:duration=first:dropout_transition=0:normalize=0.

Every parameter there is measured rather than assumed:

  - normalize=0 makes amix an exact unity-gain SUM (verified to within
    ~1e-8 over 485100 samples), so V1's own dialogue keeps its level.
    normalize=1 would duck it 6 dB, which is why the bed is attenuated
    on its own branch (BED_GAIN = 0.35) instead.
  - duration=first is what makes the bed length-agnostic: it pads a
    short bed AND cuts a long one. With duration=longest, a 20s bed on
    a 5.5s sequence produced a 20.01s audio track against 5.5s of
    video.
  - aformat must come BEFORE apad. Resampling after padding shifted
    the tail by 14 samples -- a determinism problem, not an audible
    one, but it breaks hash verification.
  - aresample=async=1 must NEVER be added here. It may insert or drop
    samples, which would make renders non-reproducible.
  - N is sum(expected_secs) -- the frame-quantized per-clip truth, not
    a wall-clock duration. The two drift by up to 0.076s under mixed
    fps plus slow motion (exactly 0 at uniform fps).
  - all=1 on adelay is required: without it, adelay shifts only the
    channels it was given delays for, so a stereo bed comes out with
    one channel early.

The delay is the first clip's head hold, frame-quantized exactly like
the hold's own gap. A hold freezes a frame BEFORE the clip proper
begins, so a bed starting at 0 would play music over that frozen frame
and land out of step with the cut. Because adelay PREPENDS silence
rather than shifting PTS, the downstream apad/atrim still measure from
0: a 1s hold means 1s of leading silence and 1s less bed heard, never
a render that runs 1s long. Past the head the bed is padded flat across
the sequence and never sees a per-clip transform, so it is
TIMELINE-LOCKED -- it plays straight through mid-sequence holds,
reverse and slow motion. Both frontend mirrors follow the same rule:
AudioBedPlayer slaves a hidden <audio> to the transport clock minus
that offset (parked paused at 0 while the offset is negative), and
AudioBedBar measures its geometry against V1's actual per-clip pixels.

ROOM TONE FILLS THE MEASURED SILENCE (the A1 Room Tone toggle)

Every gap the graph creates is anullsrc -- pure digital silence -- and
that never changes. What the toggle adds is a separate track that
fills the silence and nothing else: wherever the sequence already
carries sound, that sound comes out untouched at its own level;
wherever it carries silence, room tone plays from a fixed asset
(frontend/assets/Audio_NOISE.wav; the path is server-side, the request
sends only a boolean). It is summed as one more amix input at the very
end of the graph, like the bed.

WHICH stretches those are is measured, not inferred from layout, and
that distinction is the whole feature. clip_audio_pieces() walks the
same per-clip pieces the audio graph itself emits -- lead gap, body,
trail gap, and the sub-frame slack a non-frame-aligned trim leaves --
and marks each one as sound or silence, with the body silent when the
clip is slowed or its source has no audio stream. noise_fill_plan()
then subtracts the span the A1 track's own audio actually covers,
taken from bed_span() over the probed duration of the audio STREAM (a
container's duration reports its longest stream, which would credit a
file with sound it does not have). The complement is the fill.

Both earlier designs are worth remembering, because they failed in
opposite directions:

  - Gap-scoped by POSITION. Eligibility was a set of gap positions,
    narrowing to the head hold alone as soon as anything sat on A1 --
    so a timeline with a bed and no head hold, which is the ordinary
    case, had no eligible gap and the toggle emitted nothing at all.
    Reported twice as "Room Tone does nothing".
  - One endless layer under EVERYTHING. That filled every hole, and
    was reported immediately as "it's playing over the entire audio
    track" -- a real project's bed covers the sequence end to end, so
    tone under the bed is tone everywhere.

The rule that survives both: decide by measured coverage. Never by
position, and never by giving up on measuring.

One pair of generators (noise_fill_plan/noise_track) serves both the
V1 render and the A1 stem, so the two can never disagree about where
the tone is or how loud it is. Per run the chain is: atrim the asset's
dead tail off, aloop endlessly, volume +12 dB, aformat to the graph's
rate/layout, atrim to the run's length. Runs are concatenated per clip
and padded to that clip's own frame-quantized length. Three parts of
that are counter-intuitive and all three came out of measurement.

  - The leading atrim is not an optimization. The asset's last 856
    frames (17.8 ms) are literal zeros, so looping the file whole puts
    a silence dropout in the tone once every 3.003s -- 39 of them in a
    two-minute render, a 0.333 Hz pulse that reads as pumping. A 50 ms
    RMS scan cannot see it; a 5 ms scan shows -inf.
  - The fill is built PER CLIP, not as one span of the total. The
    sequence is a sum of per-clip roundings and a frame at 24fps is
    1837.5 samples, so a 10.0s three-clip timeline measures 441001
    samples of picture audio against 441000 for a single trim of 10.0.
  - The LAST clip's fill is built 50 ms long (NOISE_TAIL_MARGIN_SEC)
    and amix's duration=first cuts it. Merging adjacent same-kind runs
    shifts the final boundary by a half-sample, and amix reads an
    input that ends early as silence -- which left one literal (0,0)
    sample-frame at the very end of the render. Landing that rounding
    exactly is not worth attempting; overshooting and being cut is.

Switching the toggle adds one chain group and widens the final amix by
one input. Every other chain in the graph is textually identical, so
it cannot move a sample of existing audio or change one video frame --
verified by subtraction, not by ear: on a real project the bed's whole
9.4167s reach differs by exactly 0.000e+00 with the toggle on, and
across ten timeline shapes not one sample-frame of tone ever landed
over existing sound. If there is nothing to fill, the graph emitted is
byte-identical to the toggle-off graph.

It applies at RENDER time only -- the in-app preview does not emulate
it, so the toggle is inaudible until you render. Because that makes
"nothing happened" and "nothing needed filling" sound the same, both
render routes report noise_fill_sec against sequence_sec and the
frontend logs it.


6. FRAME-ACCURATE MATH: EPSILONS, FRAME BUDGETS, AND WHY THEY MATTER
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section documents two specific numerical-precision issues the
code defends against. Both were found by testing against exact frame
hashes, not by inspection -- they are the kind of off-by-one-frame bug
that looks fine until you diff every frame of a render against its
source.

EPSILON TOLERANCE ON FRAME-INDEX MATH

Converting a time in seconds to a frame index means multiplying by fps
and rounding. When a timestamp is SUPPOSED to land exactly on a frame
boundary (say, 2.0 seconds at 30fps = frame 60 exactly), floating-point
representation error can push the actual computed value to something
like 59.999999999997 or 60.000000000003 -- and a plain floor() or
ceil() on that number picks the wrong adjacent integer roughly half the
time. The fix is a small epsilon (1e-6) added or subtracted before
flooring/ceiling, nudging borderline values back onto the side of the
boundary they were actually intended to land on, regardless of which
direction the float error happened to go.

THE HARD FRAME-COUNT CAP (why every per-clip chain ends in a trim)

The whole filter_complex graph runs on an internal microsecond
timebase. The fps= normalization filter (Step 7, previous section)
can, on rare boundary cases, emit ONE extra duplicate frame at the end
of a clip's segment -- an end timestamp that lands exactly on a frame
tick can round up instead of down. Left alone, that single spurious
frame pushes every SUBSEQUENT clip's start time later by one frame
period, and the error compounds across every clip boundary in the
timeline -- a ten-clip timeline could end up several frames adrift by
the end, with each clip transition landing at a very slightly wrong
time.

The fix: the exact expected frame count for each clip's normalized
segment is computed independently, from first principles (hold frame
counts + main-body frame count adjusted for speed), BEFORE the
normalization filter runs. Every per-clip chain then ends with an
explicit trim=start_frame=0:end_frame=<that exact count>, which
truncates away the spurious duplicate if the fps filter happened to
produce one. The clip's audio track is padded or cut to match that
same exact duration, so video and audio segment lengths are always
forced identical -- a mismatch there is what would otherwise cause
progressive audio/video drift down the timeline.

That per-clip triple -- (lead_frames, trail_frames, expected_sec) --
is computed by ONE function, clip_timing(), extracted from
build_timeline_filter precisely so the A1 stem render (section 9) can
derive its length from the same arithmetic rather than a parallel
implementation that could drift from it.

OUT-OF-BOUNDS HOLD SAMPLING (the container-vs-video-duration trap)

A video file's container can report a longer duration than its video
stream actually has, because many containers pad to match whichever
track is longest -- usually audio. If a hold's one-frame sample window
were placed using the CONTAINER duration and that lands even slightly
past the video stream's real last frame, ffmpeg's trim filter selects
zero frames there: the freeze silently vanishes from the video track
while its silence still gets inserted into the audio track, desyncing
everything after it. Every place in this codebase that samples a
specific instant in time -- hold freezes, outSec clamping, reverse's
memory estimate -- uses the VIDEO STREAM's own duration for this
reason, not the container's. This is why get_video_info() tracks
"duration" and "video_duration" as two separate fields rather than one.


7. THE CLIP DATA MODEL
-------------------------

A clip on the timeline (frontend/src/App.jsx, handleAddToTimeline) is
this exact shape:

    id                 client-generated UUID; stable identity for
                       selection, React keys, and a deterministic
                       display color (hashed into a fixed 8-color
                       palette so the same clip keeps its color across
                       reorders and splits)
    sourceName         filename on disk
    sourceDir          'input' | 'output' -- lets a clip reference
                       either an original file or a previous render
    sourceDurationSec  the VIDEO STREAM's duration (see section 6),
                       captured once at add-time
    sourceWidth/Height native pixel dimensions, used by crop math
    fps                probed frame rate (falls back to 30)
    inSec / outSec     the trim window into the source, in source-time
                       seconds (not timeline seconds)
    headHoldSec        freeze duration before the sequence's first
                       clip -- only ever nonzero on clip index 0
    tailHoldSec        freeze duration after the sequence's last clip
                       -- only ever nonzero on the last clip
    roundHoldSec       "Raise"'s round-up-to-whole-second extension,
                       also only on the last clip
    reversed           plays the trim window backward
    speed              slow-motion multiplier in (0, 1]; 1 = normal
    crop               { key, w, h, x, y } in source-pixel coordinates,
                       or null
    cropKeyframes      [] or a list of { t, x, y } positions in SOURCE
                       time; when non-empty the crop box pans linearly
                       between them (section 5, Step 1)
    dirty              true if this clip has unrendered changes
    displayName        optional UI label override (used by Splice,
                       Analyze, Reconstruct so a derived clip's label
                       can diverge from its literal sourceName)

The invariant that head-holds only ever live on the first clip and
tail/round-holds only on the last is actively enforced by
sanitizeHoldPlacement() (clipMath.js) after any operation that could
reorder or restructure the timeline -- reordering, splitting,
duplicating, or deleting a clip all re-run this check and zero out any
hold that ended up stranded away from an actual sequence edge.

Timeline-domain duration math (also clipMath.js): a clip's played
length on the timeline is (outSec - inSec) / speed -- slowing a clip
to 0.5x DOUBLES its footprint on the timeline, which is why the
timeline visually stretches a clip when you slow it down.

WHAT GOES ON THE WIRE IS NOT THIS OBJECT

clipsToPayload() converts clips into the render request, and the two
shapes differ deliberately:

  - Only the timing/decision keys are sent. fps, resolution and audio
    presence are NOT -- the server re-probes every file itself
    (section 15).
  - An overlaid clip is sent with crop and cropKeyframes NULLED, and
    an `overlay` object attached instead ({input, dir, inSec, outSec,
    x, y, w, h, keyframes}) -- see section 8.
  - audioBed, fillNoise and noAudio ride BESIDE the clip list, not
    inside it: they are sequence-level, not per-clip.
  - With fillNoise on, both render responses carry noise_fill_sec and
    sequence_sec -- how much silence the fill actually found, against
    the sequence it measured. Room tone is render-only and inaudible
    in the preview, so this is the only signal that distinguishes
    "nothing happened" from "nothing needed filling"; the frontend
    logs both cases.


8. THREE TRACKS: V1, V2, A1 -- ANALYZE, RECONSTRUCT, OVERLAY, BED
--------------------------------------------------------------------

V1 is the timeline of record: it drives the playhead, the transport
controls, the ruler, and the undo history. V2 is a scratch reference
lane, deliberately kept OUTSIDE the undo history, because its usual
job is to hold a single freshly-dropped file until Analyze reshapes it
-- it's meant to be rebuilt from a rule, not hand-edited step by step.
"Outside undo" means only that Cmd/Ctrl+Z never reaches it: V2 is
otherwise a fully editable clip list, with Trim/Hold/Reverse/Speed/
Crop/Duplicate/Splice/Raise, drag-to-reorder and per-hold-segment
delete all working exactly as they do on V1. One shared toolbar serves
both, redirected by `focusedTrack` (which track was last clicked) --
the nine toolbar components never learn which track they are editing;
App.jsx hands them whichever track's clips, setter and selection are
current. When both tracks have content, V2 composites "on top" of V1
for preview purposes, the way a video track sits on top of another in
a conventional NLE; V1's own timing is unaffected either way.

A1 is a third lane under V1 holding exactly ONE audio file -- the bed
(music or voice-over). "Smart" means it owns no timing of its own: it
is linked to V1, starting where V1's PICTURE starts, padded with
silence if shorter than the sequence and cut if longer, so it cannot
drift out of sync no matter how V1 is re-edited. It MIXES with V1's
own audio rather than replacing it, attenuated by a fixed gain since
there is no volume control. Section 5 covers the graph and every
measured parameter. The bed is not clip-shaped -- no head/tail/round
segments, no edge-drag trim, no reorder -- so it is deliberately not
part of `focusedTrack`, and its gutter has an eye toggle but no focus
or mute button. Audio files are accepted into the media bin for this
one purpose (AUDIO_EXTENSIONS is separate from the video-only
ALLOWED_EXTENSIONS that clips and overlay sources gate on), and a bed
can only be added once V1 has a clip, because a bed with no V1 has no
length to take.

ANALYZE clones V1's entire cut structure -- the same IN/OUT points and
the same hold durations, clip for clip -- onto whatever file was
dropped on V2, always forced to play forward (reversed is intentionally
not copied: bringing in a different piece of footage to conform to your
cuts is not the same operation as replaying it backwards). This is the
"conform an alternate take, a cleaned master, or an AI-reprocessed
version to my exact edit" workflow. If V1's cuts run past the end of
whatever's on V2, the affected segment is clamped to fit and a warning
is surfaced with the exact overflow amount.

BATCH ANALYZE (the plain cut)

The button beside it, V2 BATCH ANALYZER, answers a different question
with a much simpler rule: it CUTS the single file on V2 at every
boundary in V1's sequence and copies nothing else. Four clips on V1
give four clips on V2, at the same places -- plus one more for each
frozen hold at the sequence's edges, since a hold is its own stretch
of the joined file.

The distinction between the two buttons is the TIME BASE, and it is
the whole reason there are two. Analyze copies V1's own IN/OUT
points, which is meaningful only when V2 is another version of the
SAME source -- there, the same timecodes still point at the same
footage. Batch Analyze assumes the opposite and much more common case
for multi-shot work: V2 holds V1's sequence JOINED into one file (a
Render V1 output, or Render V2 on its `1` mode) that went out to an
external tool and came back whole. In that file the second shot does
not begin at V1 clip 2's inSec -- it begins where clip 1 ended -- so
the boundaries are cumulative DURATIONS from the head of V2's own
window. That is also the only reading of "the same places as V1" that
lands on the frames the user sees under V1's own playhead. It is the
return leg of a `1`-mode render, exactly as 1+ is of sending each
shot out separately (section 7).

Four decisions in the math (frontend/src/analyzeMath.js,
sequencePieces + batchCutAgainstV1):

  - IT CUTS PIECES, NOT CLIPS. What the sequence renders as is a run
    of PIECES: clip 0's head hold, then each clip's body, then the
    last clip's tail hold and round-up. A hold is a piece in its own
    right, not padding attached to a clip -- in the joined file it is
    a stretch of one frozen frame, editorially a different thing from
    the footage either side of it, and in a file that has been out
    through an external tool it is the part most likely to want
    handling on its own. So the cuts fall at holds too, and the
    segments come back named Head01 / Shot01..ShotN / Tail01 /
    Round01 rather than Shot01..ShotN with the freezes buried inside
    the first and last. Tail and round-up freeze the SAME frame but
    stay separate pieces, because the timeline draws them separately
    and Raise owns the second one. Mid-sequence holds are NOT pieces:
    the render drops them (app.py's lead_hold/trail_hold first/last
    rule) and a stale one is reachable in the UI, so trusting it
    would move every later boundary here while moving nothing in the
    file being cut.
  - NOTHING ELSE IS COPIED. Holds, reverse and speed are already
    baked into that footage as frames -- re-applying them would
    duplicate them a second time, the same reasoning Reconstruct
    documents below. Each segment keeps V2's own clip's properties
    and differs from its neighbours only in where it starts and ends.
  - CUT POINTS, NOT DURATIONS. P pieces give P-1 boundaries, and the
    LAST segment runs to the end of V2's window rather than stopping
    at V1's total, because that is what cutting a file means --
    nothing is discarded. Extra length an external tool added (a
    padded frame, a longer generation) is kept on the last segment
    and reported in the Actions log rather than trimmed off silently.
    A V2 file too short for all of V1's cuts yields fewer segments,
    with the overflow reported the same way.
  - CUTS SNAP TO V2's OWN FPS GRID. V2's, not V1's -- these are
    source times on V2's file. Rounding each boundary to the nearest
    frame makes the segments tile the window exactly, instead of
    leaving a sub-frame sliver for ffmpeg's `trim` to resolve one way
    at the end of one segment and the other way at the start of the
    next. A boundary that snaps onto the previous one -- two pieces
    landing on the same frame of V2 -- is dropped rather than
    emitting an empty segment.

Only V2's FIRST clip is cut; any clip after it is left exactly as it
was, the same convention Reconstruct uses. V1 being ONE PIECE means
there are no cut points at all, and the button says so instead of
doing nothing -- note that this is a weaker condition than one clip:
a lone V1 clip carrying a head hold or a Raise does have boundaries.

RECONSTRUCT is step 2 of a round-trip workflow, not a standalone
inverse of Analyze. The intended sequence: Analyze conforms V2 to V1's
cuts (as above); the user then takes V2's rendered footage out of the
app entirely -- through an external tool, e.g. a style-transfer model
-- and drops the result back onto V2. Render V2 always merges every V2
clip into ONE continuous file, and dropping a file back onto V2
(handleAddToV2) always replaces V2 with a single fresh clip -- so by
the time Reconstruct runs, V2 is always exactly one clip, even if V1
has several. Reconstruct strips the edit artifacts V1's decisions baked
into that round-tripped footage back OUT of V2's own clip. It never
touches or copies V1's own sourceName -- V2 keeps whatever file is
already on it.

Because V2 always collapses to one clip, holds and round-up are
computed as SEQUENCE-level facts about V1 -- headHoldSec from V1's
FIRST clip, tailHoldSec+roundHoldSec from V1's LAST clip -- the same
convention sanitizeHoldPlacement/RaiseButton already enforce elsewhere
(a head-hold only ever lives on the first clip of a sequence, tail/
round-hold only ever on the last). An earlier version of this function
paired V2 clip i against V1 clip i positionally, which silently dropped
any hold or reversed flag living on a V1 clip other than the one V2
happened to line up against -- fixed by aggregating over the whole V1
sequence instead of any single clip.

What "reverse the decision" means differs per field, because holds,
speed, and crop are physically baked into the pixels by the time
footage comes back from outside the app:
  reversed  -- copied AS-IS, not toggled, and ONLY when every V1 clip
              agrees on it. If V1 played backward, the round-tripped
              file is ALSO in that reversed frame order, so setting
              V2's own reversed flag to the same value plays it
              backward a second time, landing back on true
              chronological order. A V1 sequence with SOME clips
              reversed and some not can't be represented by a single
              V2 clip's one reversed flag -- that case warns and
              leaves V2's own flag untouched rather than guessing.
  holds     -- V1's sequence-level head/tail/round holds are duplicated
              frames physically present at the very start/end of the
              rendered output; trimmed off V2's own inSec/outSec
              window.
  speed     -- V1's slow-down is already realized as repeated frames
              at the stretched duration; V2's speed resets to 1 so it
              isn't slowed a second time.
  crop      -- UNRECOVERABLE. Pixels outside V1's crop box don't exist
              in the round-tripped footage. Reset to null rather than
              pretending to restore them.
Requires clips on both V1 and V2.

V2 AS AN OVERLAY (the composite render)

The round-trip above loses the crop, and the overlay feature is what
recovers it: instead of REPLACING V1, a V2 clip can be composited back
onto V1 at the crop box's animated position -- crop a moving region out
of V1, run it through an external tool, drop the result on V2, and put
it back exactly where it came from. Which V2 clips do that is decided
entirely by frontend/src/overlayMatch.js, and its rules are
deliberate:

  - The TRIGGER is a resolution difference and nothing else. V2 not
    equal in size to V1 means overlay; equal size means the
    pre-existing full-frame replacement. No flag, no opt-in.
  - The size must match the crop box EXACTLY or the pairing is refused
    with a warning in the Actions log. Nothing is resampled: a 961x960
    file next to a 960x960 box is an upstream mistake, and silently
    scaling it would bake a soft, misaligned region into an otherwise
    lossless render. (A warning, not an alert -- the match is derived
    continuously, so an alert would fire on every keystroke of a
    resize.)
  - Pairing is POSITIONAL -- 1st V2 clip onto 1st V1 clip, 2nd onto
    2nd -- each inheriting that V1 clip's own crop box and keyframes.
  - The crop becomes a PLACEMENT RECT, not a crop: the overlaid V1
    clip renders uncropped (section 7), because the point is the full
    original frame with the processed region on top.

There is exactly one way to reach a composite render: the A / A/B
switch beside Render V2. In A (default) Render V2 renders the V2 track
alone, as before. In A/B it renders V1 with the overlays attached, and
is deliberately MORE permissive in one specific way: it passes
fullFrameSameSize, so a V2 clip matching V1's resolution becomes a
full-frame overlay at 0,0 rather than an ordinary track replacement --
which is exactly what "put V2 on top of V1" means when the two are the
same size. The exception is a CROPPED V1 clip: it renders at its crop
box, so a source-sized V2 over it has two possible meanings and is
refused with an explanation rather than guessed. The live overlay
layers in the preview are purely visual (a second <video> element per
overlay); nothing but an A/B render produces overlay specs.

A SECOND switch beside that one, 1 / 1+, decides how many FILES the
same click writes. The two are orthogonal: A / A/B decides what a shot
contains, 1 / 1+ decides whether the shots land in one file or in one
file each.

  - 1 (default) is the original behavior: the whole track joined into a
    single clip, one ffmpeg pass, one file.
  - 1+ renders every cut on its own -- N passes, N files, named
    <name>_01, _02 ... in track order (zero-padded so a series sorts in
    cut order in Finder). The cuts are the track that render is built
    from: V2's own clips in A, V1's clips in A/B, where V2's clips are
    overlays ON V1's cuts rather than cuts of their own.

Laid end to end, a 1+ series IS the 1 render -- verified frame for
frame (180/180, framemd5) across a track carrying a head hold, a
reverse, a slow-down and a tail+round hold. Three things differ, all
of them consequences of a shot being its own file rather than a segment
of one:

  - Target resolution and frame rate come from that one clip instead of
    the largest and fastest on the track, so a shot is no longer padded
    up to a bigger neighbor's frame (measured: a 160x120 cropped clip
    renders 160x120 alone, 320x240 padded when joined to a 320x240
    clip).
  - A size-capped quality mode budgets each file separately, so N shots
    means N files each under the cap.
  - Audio splits at the same points, each file with its own AAC frame
    boundaries; A1 is left out entirely, because the lane is timed to
    the whole V1 sequence (one delay, one length) and re-laying it under
    each shot would restart it at every cut. Render A1 still writes it.

Holds stay a property of the SEQUENCE in 1+, not of each shot: the
head hold opens the first shot and the tail/round hold closes the last,
exactly as in one file. A stale mid-sequence hold (a Raise on what used
to be the last clip, before another was appended) is zeroed for the
same reason -- the joined render ignores it, so the split must too, or
that shot would come out longer than the stretch it stands for.

Either picture track can be rendered independently through the exact
same pipeline described in sections 4 and 5.


9. THE A1 STEM RENDER (AUDIO ALONE, TIMED TO THE PICTURE)
-------------------------------------------------------------

Render A1 (/api/render_a1) renders the A1 track BY ITSELF to a .wav
that is exactly as long as the equivalent V1 render, so it drops into
another tool already in sync. Codec is always pcm_s16le -- this is a
stem to mix elsewhere, so it never uses the lossy export-quality
codec, and there is no quality choice to make (hence no render
dialog).

It is deliberately built out of the V1 graph's own parts rather than as
a parallel implementation: clip_timing() (section 6) supplies the
length, and the bed chain is reproduced node for node from
build_timeline_filter -- adelay -> aformat -> apad -> atrim -> asetpts
-> volume, summed with the same amix settings -- then mixed against a
silence skeleton built PER CLIP (not as one anullsrc of the total), so
it quantizes exactly the way the V1 graph's own [aseq] does. The
skeleton carries no sound; it is there for the LENGTH. Room tone, when
on, comes from the same noise_fill_plan() run against the same clip
list, so the stem places tone in exactly the stretches the V1 render
fills -- which is why each clip's has_audio is load-bearing here even
though no clip audio is rendered. A stem that would be entirely
silent (tone on, no A1 track, nothing to fill) is refused with that
explanation rather than written.

NO CLIP IS OPENED AS AN FFMPEG INPUT. The clips are probed for fps and
video_duration and nothing else; only the bed and the room tone asset
are opened. That is why an A1 render costs about a second on a
timeline that takes minutes to render as video.

Verified against the equivalent V1 render: identical sample count
(3.500000s single clip; 7.000000s on a 3-clip mixed-fps timeline with
a reversal, a 0.5x slow-down, a 0.51s head hold and a tail+round
hold), and by subtraction: ((V1+A1+tone) - V1plain) - A1stem leaves
3.73e-09 on a timeline carrying clip audio, holds at both ends, a
silent source and a slow-motion clip, with all three passes at exactly
286650 sample-frames -- well under one float32 LSB and therefore
bit-identical once quantized. One measured imperfection, pre-existing
and unrelated to room tone: where per-clip frame counts are odd the
half-sample roundings accumulate and the stem can come out a sample or
two SHORTER than the render's audio (536549 against 536551 on a
12.1667s three-clip timeline, identically with the toggle off and on),
where the anullsrc skeleton and the real-audio path round differently
-- about 45 microseconds, not an alignment error.


10. REFORMAT: THE ONE-SHOT RESIZE OUTSIDE THE TIMELINE
----------------------------------------------------------

/api/reformat scales ONE file down to fit inside a (resolution tier,
aspect ratio) bounding box and writes a brand-new file. It is the one
render in the app that has nothing to do with the timeline: it takes no
clip list, needs no clips at all, and acts on whatever is selected in
the Media Bin. Its UI is the Reformat tab of the center dock.

    resolutions   480p, 720p, 1080p, 4K
    ratios        16:9, 4:3, 1:1, 3:4, 9:16, 21:9, or "adaptive"

CONTAIN-FIT, NEVER UPSCALED, NEVER LETTERBOXED: the output dimensions
are whatever the proportional scale-down produces, so the source's own
aspect ratio survives exactly and no black bars are added (unlike the
timeline's own normalization step, which must pad because concat
demands one canvas). "adaptive" is the special ratio that keeps the
SOURCE's aspect ratio, sized to roughly that tier's pixel budget.

It reads from input/ or the export directory and never modifies the
source, always writes to the export directory (like render_timeline,
never back into the media bin), auto-numbers the filename on
collision, and honors the active export quality mode -- including the
three two-pass ones, through the same multipass_export_render
dispatcher.


11. PREVIEW TRANSCODING IS FULLY ISOLATED FROM THE LOSSLESS PATH
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Browsers cannot natively decode many of the codecs this app is
specifically built to edit losslessly -- ProRes, DNxHD, 10-bit sources,
HEVC (including this app's own HEVC exports), and others.
get_or_make_preview() solves this without ever touching the lossless
render path:

  - If a source is already browser-safe (H.264/VP8/VP9/AV1 video with
    AAC/MP3/Opus/Vorbis/silent audio), its ORIGINAL file path is
    returned completely unchanged. No transcode ever happens for
    footage that doesn't need one.

  - Otherwise, a disposable H.264 + yuv420p + AAC proxy is generated
    once into .preview_cache/, keyed by filename AND modification
    time (so editing a source file in place invalidates its stale
    cached preview automatically), and reused on every subsequent
    preview request for that unchanged file.

This transcode is intentionally NOT lossless -- it exists purely so an
HTML5 <video> tag has something to play, and it is never fed back into
any edit, trim, splice, hold, reverse, or render operation. Every one
of those operations always reads from the original source file. The
only code path that ever touches .preview_cache/ is the /preview route
itself.

Which URL the UI uses is derived, not configured: the probe returns
browser_playable (is the codec in BROWSER_SAFE_VIDEO_CODECS?) and the
frontend swaps to /preview/<dir>/<name> when it is false. That is why
the HEVC export modes needed no preview code of their own -- an HEVC
render simply reports browser_playable=false and takes the existing
path.

FRAME GRABS COME FROM THE PREVIEW ELEMENT, NOT FROM A RENDER

The two IMAGE buttons in the preview header (PNG download, clipboard
copy) draw the frame the preview is parked on straight from the shared
<video> element in the browser -- no backend round-trip, no ffmpeg.
They crop the draw to the probed true width/height, mirroring the
player's own clip-path, so a macroblock-padded bitstream's fringe stays
out of the PNG. The crop box and overlay layers are separate DOM
elements over the video, so they are deliberately NOT captured.


12. THE AGENTIC ASSISTANT EDITOR AND ITS SECURITY MODEL
-------------------------------------------------------------

The chat panel turns a plain-English request into a proposed ffmpeg
command, via a two-step, human-in-the-loop flow:

  1. /api/chat sends your instruction (plus the current file listing
     and, if a clip is selected, its filename as the likely target) to
     a local Claude CLI process, run non-interactively with NO tool
     access of its own -- it can only respond with structured text
     (an ffmpeg command + a one-sentence explanation), matching a
     strict JSON schema. It cannot execute anything itself. The server
     validates the proposed command but does not run it.

  2. Only after you click Run does /api/execute receive the
     user-approved command string and re-validate it independently
     before finally running it.

The validator (validate_ffmpeg_command) has two layers:

  - No shell is ever involved. subprocess.run is always called with
    an argv LIST, never shell=True -- so characters like ; ( ) $ are
    inert data inside one argument, not shell syntax. This is why the
    code deliberately does NOT blocklist those characters: ffmpeg's
    own -filter_complex syntax legitimately uses them, and there is no
    shell present for them to exploit in the first place. (The Custom
    export mode's extra-args field is validated on the same
    principle -- see section 4.)

  - The first token must be literally "ffmpeg", and even then the
    real hardcoded binary path is substituted in regardless of what
    the model produced -- there is no way a crafted string can make a
    different program execute. Every input/output path in the command
    is resolved to its real absolute path and must fall inside this
    project's input/ or output/ directories; anything outside is
    rejected, and any input path that doesn't actually exist on disk
    is rejected too.

Net effect: the assistant has full creative freedom over what ffmpeg
command it proposes, but it can never touch a file outside this
project's own folders and can never execute anything other than the
real ffmpeg binary.

When a Run succeeds and a clip is selected on the timeline, the
produced file is loaded onto that clip in place -- its trim, holds,
reverse, speed, and crop are all reset to defaults, because the edit
is now baked into new pixels and none of those settings, which
referred to the old source, still mean anything.


13. WHAT PERSISTS ON DISK
-----------------------------

There is no database and no migration system. Five things outlive a
session, all of them plain JSON or plain files:

    projects/<name>.nara            saved timelines
    .export_settings.json           global export configuration
    .preview_cache/                 disposable transcoded proxies
    frontend/assets/Audio_NOISE.wav the room tone asset (read-only;
                                     pcm_s16le, 48 kHz stereo, 3.003s)
    localStorage                    per-bin favorites, sticky track tags

A .nara project is { version: 4, clips, track2Clips, audioBed,
selectedId, exportPresets }. Version 3 added audioBed, 4 added
exportPresets. Nothing READS the version field -- it is a marker for
humans, and older files load unchanged because every addition degrades
to a sensible empty value (no bed, no presets). The
backend treats the file as opaque JSON except for validating that
clips is a list. Opening a project MERGES its export presets into the
local set rather than replacing them, so opening someone else's
project can't wipe your own saved settings; the project's copy wins a
case-insensitive name clash.

.export_settings.json holds { output_dir?, quality, custom, presets }.
output_dir is ABSENT rather than empty when the default export folder
is in use. Two different dialogs write to this one document -- the
Export Bin's gear owns output_dir and quality, the top bar's gear owns
custom and presets -- so POST /api/export_settings is a PARTIAL
update: it touches only the keys actually present in the request body.
Either dialog posting the whole document would wipe the other's field.

localStorage is the only client-side persistence: favorites per bin
(nara-favorites-<dir>) and sticky V1/V2/A1 track tags
(nara-track-tags). Both are keyed by FILENAME, which is why renaming a
file has to carry them over explicitly.


14. BACKEND API REFERENCE
----------------------------

Media serving
    GET  /                          legacy vanilla-JS UI
    GET  /input/<name>              raw file from input/
    GET  /output/<name>             raw file from the current export dir
    GET  /preview/<in|out>/<name>   browser-playable proxy (section 11)

Listing / probing
    GET  /api/files                 list input/
    GET  /api/outputs               list the current export dir
    GET  /api/probe/<name>?dir=     ffprobe details for one file
                                     (dir=input default, or output)

Upload / delete
    POST   /api/upload              add a file to input/ (2 GB cap)
    POST   /api/clear_input         delete everything in input/
    POST   /api/clear_output        delete everything in the export dir
    DELETE /api/files/<name>        delete one source file
    DELETE /api/outputs/<name>      delete one export
    POST   /api/rename_file         rename in input/ or the export dir
                                     (dir=input|output)

Project library (.nara JSON files)
    GET    /api/projects            list saved projects
    POST   /api/projects            save one
    GET    /api/projects/<name>     load one
    DELETE /api/projects/<name>     delete one

Export settings
    GET  /api/export_settings       output_dir + default_output_dir +
                                     quality + custom + presets +
                                     custom_defaults + custom_options
                                     (the dropdown vocabulary, so the
                                     UI never hardcodes a list the
                                     validator would reject)
    POST /api/export_settings       PARTIAL update of any of
                                     {output_dir, quality, custom,
                                     presets}
    POST /api/browse_directory      native macOS folder picker
    POST /api/reveal_file           reveal a file in Finder (dir=)

Renders
    POST /api/render_timeline       render an entire clip list in one
                                     ffmpeg pass (sections 4-6), with
                                     optional audioBed / fillNoise /
                                     noAudio
    POST /api/render_a1             render the A1 track alone to a
                                     .wav timed to the V1 sequence
                                     (section 9)
    POST /api/reformat              one-shot contain-fit resize of a
                                     single file (section 10)

One-shot editing operations (legacy-UI-facing; each writes one new file)
    POST /api/trim                  -ss/-to trim of one file
    POST /api/splice                concatenate 2+ files
    POST /api/hold_frame            freeze one frame for a duration
    POST /api/reverse               reverse one file (RAM-estimate
                                     warn/confirm flow above 2 GiB)

Chat / assistant
    POST /api/chat                  propose a command, never run it
    POST /api/execute               run a user-approved command

Every route follows the same error convention: {"error": ..., "detail":
...} with 400 for validation/path problems, 404 for missing files, 500
for ffmpeg/probe failures, 502 for chat-CLI failures, 504 for timeouts.
Every client-supplied filename is resolved through a traversal guard
(safe_path) before it touches the filesystem.


15. KNOWN SHARP EDGES
------------------------

  - The server NEVER trusts client-supplied fps, audio presence, or
    resolution for a render -- it always re-probes the actual file
    itself. Only the edit decisions themselves (in/out points, hold
    durations, reversed, speed, crop, overlay geometry) come from the
    request. Overlay dimensions in particular are checked against the
    overlay file's own probe, not the client's claim.

  - A literal speed value of 0 is deliberately checked with an
    explicit "is None" test rather than Python's "or" pattern -- using
    "or" would treat 0 the same as "not provided" and silently
    substitute the default speed, skipping validation that should have
    rejected it. This was a real bug caught during testing.

  - /api/reverse can return HTTP 200 (not an error status) carrying a
    warning instead of a result, when its RAM estimate for buffering
    the whole clip exceeds 2 GiB and the request didn't already say
    confirm: true. This is a deliberate soft-block, not a failure.

  - The custom export mode gives the WHOLE byte budget to video and
    reserves nothing for audio (section 4). That is as specified, but
    it means a long render with high-bitrate source audio can overshoot
    its cap on the first attempt and pay for a full two-pass retry.
    Lower the safety headroom for those.

  - amix normalize=0 is an exact sum, so headroom is the caller's
    problem. Clip audio at full scale plus a 0.35 bed already reaches
    +2.61 dBFS with no tone at all, and AAC does not clamp it (a hot
    test measured +3.44 dB surviving the encode). Room tone adds
    nothing to that, since it plays only where nothing else does: the
    render peak is max(existing peak, -12.83 dBFS), measured unchanged
    at -9.06 dBFS with the toggle off and on. The bed's exposure is
    real; the tone's is not.

  - Which routes honor a custom export directory is not uniform.
    Writing: render_timeline, render_a1 and reformat use
    get_output_dir(); the older single-shot routes (trim, splice,
    hold_frame, reverse) still write to the default output/ regardless.
    Reading: /api/outputs, /output/<name> and both delete routes follow
    get_output_dir(), but /api/probe?dir=output and /preview/out/<name>
    resolve against the DEFAULT output/ only -- so with a custom export
    directory set, a listed export can still fail to probe or to build
    a preview proxy, which is exactly what the HEVC/10-bit export modes
    need.

  - All machine-specific paths (ffmpeg/ffprobe binary locations, the
    Claude CLI path) are hardcoded for this specific development
    machine, not auto-detected.
